
#Introduction

This book teaches programming using Java. Java is a powerful language that runs on practically every type of computer. It can be used to create large applications or small programs
that are part of a Web site. Before plunging right into learning Java, however, this chapter
will review the fundamentals of computer hardware and software, and then take a broad
look at computer programming in general.

# Why Program?

Concept: Computers can do many different jobs because they are programmable.
Every profession has tools that make the job easier to do. Carpenters use hammers, saws,
and measuring tapes. Mechanics use wrenches, screwdrivers, and ratchets. Electronics technicians use probes, scopes, and meters. Some tools are unique and can be categorized as
belonging to a single profession. For example, surgeons have certain tools that are designed
specifically for surgical operations. Those tools probably aren’t used by anyone other than
surgeons. There are some tools, however, that are used in several professions. Screwdrivers,
for instance, are used by mechanics, carpenters, and many others.
The computer is a tool used by so many professions that it cannot be easily categorized. It
can perform so many different jobs that it is perhaps the most versatile tool ever made. To the
accountant, computers balance books, analyze profits and losses, and prepare tax reports.
To the factory worker, computers control manufacturing machines and track production.
To the mechanic, computers analyze the various systems in an automobile and pinpoint
hard-to-find problems. The computer can do such a wide variety of tasks because it can 
2 Chapter 1 Introduction to Computers and Java
be programmed. It is a machine specifically designed to follow instructions. Because of the
computer’s programmability, it doesn’t belong to any single profession. Computers are
designed to do whatever job their programs, or software, tell them to do.
Computer programmers do a very important job. They create software that transforms
computers into the specialized tools of many trades. Without programmers, the users of
computers would have no software, and without software, computers would not be able to
do anything.
Computer programming is both an art and a science. It is an art because every aspect of a
program should be carefully designed. Here are a few of the things that must be designed
for any real-world computer program:
  •	 The logical flow of the instructions
  •	 The mathematical procedures
  •	 The layout of the programming statements
  •	 The appearance of the screens
  •	 The way information is presented to the user
  •	 The program’s “user friendliness”
  •	 Manuals, help systems, and/or other forms of written documentation
There is also a science to programming. Because programs rarely work right the first time
they are written, a lot of analyzing, experimenting, correcting, and redesigning is required.
This demands patience and persistence of the programmer. Writing software demands discipline as well. Programmers must learn special languages such as Java because computers do
not understand English or other human languages. Programming languages have strict rules
that must be carefully followed.
Both the artistic and scientific nature of programming makes writing computer software
like designing a car: Both cars and programs should be functional, efficient, powerful, easy
to use, and pleasing to look at.

Computer Systems: Hardware and Software
Concept: All computer systems consist of similar hardware devices and
software components.
Hardware
Hardware refers to the physical components that a computer is made of. A computer, as we
generally think of it, is not an individual device, but a system of devices. Like the instruments in a symphony orchestra, each device plays its own part. A typical computer system
consists of the following major components:
•	 The central processing unit (CPU)
•	 Main memory
•	 Secondary storage devices
•	 Input devices
•	 Output devices
The organization of a computer system is shown in Figure 1-1.

Let’s take a closer look at each of these devices.
The CPU
At the heart of a computer is its central processing unit, or CPU. The CPU’s job is to fetch
instructions, follow the instructions, and produce some resulting data. Internally, the central
processing unit consists of two parts: the control unit and the arithmetic and logic unit (ALU).
The control unit coordinates all of the computer’s operations. It is responsible for determining where to get the next instruction and regulating the other major components of the computer with control signals. The arithmetic and logic unit, as its name suggests, is designed to
perform mathematical operations. The organization of the CPU is shown in Figure 1-2.

A program is a sequence of instructions stored in the computer’s memory. When a computer
is running a program, the CPU is engaged in a process known formally as the fetch/decode/
execute cycle. The steps in the fetch/decode/execute cycle are as follows:

Fetch The CPU’s control unit fetches, from main memory, the next instruction in the
sequence of program instructions.
Decode The instruction is encoded in the form of a number. The control unit decodes the
instruction and generates an electronic signal.
Execute The signal is routed to the appropriate component of the computer (such as the
ALU, a disk drive, or some other device). The signal causes the component to
perform an operation.
These steps are repeated as long as there are instructions to perform.

Main Memory
Commonly known as random access memory, or RAM, the computer’s main memory is a
device that holds information. Specifically, RAM holds the sequences of instructions in the
programs that are running and the data those programs are using.
Memory is divided into sections that hold an equal amount of data. Each section is made of
eight “switches” that may be either on or off. A switch in the on position usually represents
the number 1, whereas a switch in the off position usually represents the number 0. The computer stores data by setting the switches in a memory location to a pattern that represents a
character or a number. Each of these switches is known as a bit, which stands for binary
digit. Each section of memory, which is a collection of eight bits, is known as a byte. Each
byte is assigned a unique number known as an address. The addresses are ordered from
lowest to highest. A byte is identified by its address in much the same way a post office box
is identified by an address. Figure 1-3 shows a series of bytes with their addresses. In the
illustration, sample data is stored in memory. The number 149 is stored in the byte at
address 16, and the number 72 is stored in the byte at address 23.
RAM is usually a volatile type of memory, used only for temporary storage. When the computer is turned off, the contents of RAM are erased.

Secondary Storage
Secondary storage is a type of memory that can hold data for long periods of time—even
when there is no power to the computer. Frequently used programs are stored in secondary
memory and loaded into main memory as needed. Important data, such as word processing
documents, payroll data, and inventory figures, is saved to secondary storage as well.
The most common type of secondary storage device is the disk drive. A traditional disk
drive stores data by magnetically encoding it onto a spinning circular disk. Solid state
drives, which store data in solid-state memory, are increasingly becoming popular. A
solid-state drive has no moving parts, and operates faster than a traditional disk drive. 

Most computers have some sort of secondary storage device, either a traditional disk
drive or a solid-state drive, mounted inside their case. External drives are also available,
which connect to one of the computer’s communication ports. External drives can be used to
create backup copies of important data or to move data to another computer.
In addition to external drives, many types of devices have been created for copying data, and
for moving it to other computers. Universal Serial Bus drives, or USB drives are small
devices that plug into the computer’s USB (Universal Serial Bus) port, and appear to the
system as a disk drive. These drives do not actually contain a disk, however. They store data
in a special type of memory known as flash memory. USB drives are inexpensive, reliable,
and small enough to be carried in your pocket.
Optical devices such as the CD (compact disc) and the DVD (digital versatile disc) are also
popular for data storage. Data is not recorded magnetically on an optical disc, but is
encoded as a series of pits on the disc surface. CD and DVD drives use a laser to detect the
pits and thus read the encoded data. Optical discs hold large amounts of data, and because
recordable CD and DVD drives are now commonplace, they make a good medium for
creating backup copies of data.

Input Devices
Input is any data the computer collects from the outside world. The device that collects the
data and sends it to the computer is called an input device. Common input devices are the
keyboard, mouse, scanner, and digital camera. Disk drives, optical drives, and USB drives
can also be considered input devices because programs and data are retrieved from them
and loaded into the computer’s memory.
Output Devices
Output is any data the computer sends to the outside world. It might be a sales report, a
list of names, or a graphic image. The data is sent to an output device, which formats and
presents it. Common output devices are monitors and printers. Disk drives, USB drives,
and CD recorders can also be considered output devices because the CPU sends data to
them to be saved.

